# Self-Hosted Real-Time Video (srv)
srv is a free, self-hosted method of streaming real-time video and interacting with viewers. Viewers can follow video feeds, rate and comment on videos, and more. There are two ways of interacting with srv, either through a dedicated GUI (`srv-gui`) or the CLI (`srv-host` and `srv-watch`). All data is currently required to be stored on the server, with remote support planned. There is no support for advertisements or tracking cookies, but there is planned monetization support.
***Warning***: This is not ready for production use yet. There is currently no guarantee on security, any system you publicly expose this on should not contain any private information.

## Table of Contents
- [Installation](#installation)
- [How This Works](#how-this-works)
  - [Viewers](#viewers)
  - [Hosts](#hosts)
- [Technical Details](#technical-details)
  - [Integration](#integration)
  - [Optimization](#optimization)
  - [Discovery](#discovery)
  - [Protocols](#protocols)
  - [Security](#security)
- [Philosophy](#philosophy)

## Installation
Currently the only form of installation is to `git clone` this repo and `cargo build` everything, but for release standalone binaries will be provided. The MVP will have 4 core binaries, with a 5th planned as a long-term goal.
- `srv-daemon` is a small Actix Web server and is required to provide a pre-built video streaming solution. This would only be required for hosts, but for the MVP it will be required.
- `srv-host` is a CLI tool to create and manage your feeds.
- `srv-watch` is a CLI client to allow you to interact with feeds and watch videos
- `srv-gui` is an all-in-one binary that comes with a full GUI for all features for hosting and watching. It will include the ability to run the daemon, though it will not be running by default
- `srv-stateless` is a planned stateless replacement for `srv-daemon`. Instead of using local storage, all state is held by remote sources.
Usage information will be available for each package in the associated README

## How This Works
None of the technology used in this project is new, but it's being connected in a novel way. This is a feature, as it means that protocols used are already battle-tested and have security built in. Video service and interactions are all a simple HTTPS API. Subscriptions and notifications are handled using RSS, so it will integrate with any existing RSS client. Data storage is all done locally, using SQLite for now with more options planned. `srv-watch` will also integrate with your preferred video player, as long as it supports streaming video from a URL. Identity management will be done using an RSA keypair to allow for users to have profiles and interact with each other like on other services. The GUI is not a web app, it's built using the `iced` crate, so you will not be running another Chrome browser by using it. This means that on systems with limited resources (particularly RAM), the `srv-gui` will probably perform *better than YouTube*.

### Viewers
Viewers will be able to subscribe to many different feeds (equivalent of a channel), and see the new videos from their subscriptions in chronological order. When one is selected it opens the video and starts playing, all without any ads or data harvesting. You can like or comment, and those will get sent to the host server and shown to other users. Even though each feed is on a different server, the client aggregates all of them into one convenient place.

### Hosts
srv will both work as a standalone server, or integrate with your existing server. Hosts will be able to add new posts, edit their feed, and make other administrative changes in the UI. When you add a post it will optimize your videos, generate a link for them, and send a notification to your feed about it. You will also have the option to gate content to a certain audience using a whitelist of allowed keys. If a user requests the video but is not on the whitelist, they will get an error and be unable to watch. This allows for "unlisted" videos, but more importantly creator-controlled monetization. If you're running these servers and storing the data yourself there is a cost to that, so a way to handle monetization needs to be built in. This simple solution allows you to handle payment in any way you want, Patreon, one-time purchase on a stripe form, smart contract, anything you want; you just have to put their public key on the whitelist.


## Technical Details
The following will be an in-depth explanation for those who want to know.

### Integration
Until the creation of the stateless backend, srv does require its own server. This is to provide a complete video streaming solution, without it videos wouldn't support features like skipping ahead or scrubbing, would break on many clients unless it was implemented manually by the host. To minimize the overhead of needing a second server running if you want to integrate this with your existing server, the daemon has been kept minimal. It handles the entire API, so it can either be used standalone if you don't want a website associated with the server, or you can use your existing server as a reverse-proxy and route traffic directly to and from the server. You could also just integrate the spec yourself and not use the standalone server at all, which is always going to be an option.

### Optimization
All videos will be automatically optimized for you, but it is configurable. There will be a few options for encoding type and the supported resolutions, but it will be limited to toggling options from the standard best practices. This is so that every host won't need to learn the best practices of video encoding and instead can focus on the resources they use. A number of copies of the video will be made in each resolution and encoding format selected. This is required to support real-time playback to users in multiple resolutions, but this does mean that providing many options will multiply the storage requirements. Adding on-demand optimization so only one master copy could be possible, but care will need to be taken to make sure it's performant.
For clients there will be an extended video cache, so leaving a video paused could download the entire thing temporarily so it plays entirely with no interruptions. The limit to this will be configurable, but for those who can spare the disk space it could eliminate all buffering even on a spotty connection. One big weakness of a self-hosted approach is that a less powerful server might struggle to handle the workload and cause poor performance to the user. This is unavoidable with the self-hosted model, so this will allow viewers to still enjoy the content without constant interruptions. For the same reason, a direct download option will be available. There's no way downloads could be prevented, so instead they will be embraced as a feature.

### Discovery
Without centralization discovery for new creators is a major roadblock, there are a few solutions planned for this. The first is an extension to the RSS feed that lets one creator link to other feeds they want to promote. This could be other feeds they control, or other creators they think their fans will also enjoy. This will allow clients to support a feed of new suggested content, but instead of algorithmic recommendations they are populated based on suggestions from the feeds you follow. This would essentially exchange a feed powered by AI for one powered by human intelligence, with at most algorithmic sorting and filtering on the client side.

### Protocols
Currently only HTTP is supported but this will not be the case for long. HTTP operation will be supported for those reverse-proxying from an existing HTTPS server on the same local network, but support for an HTTPS certificate is on the way. ***Until at least that point, this project should not be used***. RSS is the only supported syndicated feed format right now, but others will be supported in future. The format is extended to allow for additional functionality, but all core functions will be within the spec allowing it to operate with existing clients. The extensions will be used only for additional features to give those using video clients a more rich experience. JSON is used as the format of choice for the API, chosen for its small package size and existing support. It won't require downloading any special packages to create a new srv-compliant host or client, it only requires web requests and JSON which is near universally supported.

### Security
Any piece of software you publicly expose to the internet needs to have a security-first mindset. No security solution used here is brand new, though the way they are composed is fairly unique.

For decentralized identity I am using RSA, each keypair will act as an account and the private key is stored on your local machine. There will be a key associated with the feed so the creator can be verified, and comments will be in plaintext but contain a signed checksum. One limitation of this format is that there is no way for a client to verify that checksum, they will have to trust the host hasn't tampered with the database. It will however protect the original signer from being held responsible, as the checksum would either be invalid or signed with a different key after alteration. When a user first connects to the host their public key will be sent and used to generate a JWT to track their session. JWT keys will be autogenerated by the server and in-memory only. Certain things will be configurable, such as duration before expiry, and support for a specified signing key could be added if requested. RSA is trusted as it serves as the solution for the blockchain's decentralized identity, all accounts will essentially be crypto wallets just used for a different task off-chain. **This project contains no blockchain integration**, but this problem has already been solved so the trusted solution is used. JWTs were chosen as they are what powers pretty much all session management on the web already, and have packages with regular security audits. For key-verification a standard challenge-response system is used. The server generates a random nonce and sends it to the client, who returns it signed with the key they signed with. The server will check that the signed nonce matches the provided key, and if so will return them a JWT.

Care is taken to not trust any user input directly, especially for network or file-system operations. For example generated video IDs are stored in a database table and do not correlate with the file name, preventing reading of any files other than the expected ones. This software is designed without handrails, so unauthorized access to administrative functions is carefully guarded. On feed creation you will be able to provide a single authorized key for administrative actions. As this software will run on a server, a remote administrative endpoint will be required for most users. Only a user authorized with the administrative key will be able to access these endpoints, and they will be able to be disabled entirely if you are comfortable connecting to the server directly through something like SSH.


## Philosophy
YouTube has a monopoly on online, independent, long-form video content. Other solutions exist, but most suffer from the same issue as YouTube, they're entirely centralized.
- For creators this means little security, they are completely subject to the whims of YouTube and its algorithm because there is nowhere else to go.
- Viewers are stuck using a Google service that tracks your every click and has gone so far to prevent adblock that they are willing to risk ruining the experience of those who don't use it. All this while ads get more and more intrusive, the ads get longer, become unskippable, and then multiply and you have no choice except to just not watch the thing you wanted to see.
- Centralization is even a problem for the host themselves, it's no secret that Twitch is not profitable and YouTube is not making as much as one might expect with its monopoly and business practices. Their scale is their problem, handling that much video data at real-time speeds is incredibly expensive. This is why another centralized solution will only fail, it can never out-compete Google there.

There have been other solutions to this problem using technology like P2P, but I think these fail because the peer relationship between all users doesn't match with the actual way these platforms are used. The model srv uses directly mirrors the way it's used, as an observer pattern. Creators create their content and keep full control of it, and users can subscribe to the feed of many independent creators and view it all in one aggregated place. As long as all the creators are serving their video using one consistent API, the client does not care which server it subscribes to, and any client that can interact with the API can work as a client and subscribe to any creator. This completely solves all the aforementioned problems.
- For creators this will provide an additional place to host video and monetize that content that is fully self-controlled. You won't be affected by algorithms, censors forcing you to be "ad-friendly", or YouTube never defending your legal right to host content that is fair use (that defense will fall on you). If this gained popularity as a spec it would even benefit those creators not using it, as simply having an alternative would give creators significantly more power over YouTube.
- For users it gives unparalleled privacy. There are no ads that aren't in the video from the creator, there is no personal data collection, you never even give personal data to collect. Your account is only a keypair, so it's free for anyone - no email, phone number, or name required.
- Hosting becomes feasibly profitable without serious exploitation if you just reduce the scale. By taking away the monolith, not only does hosting become more affordable but you can even provide features that would not be available at the scale of YouTube

The goal of this project is not just to create a simple server and client framework to allow for creators to host their own videos. My goal is to define a spec for online web content streaming that can be implemented by any server and client. Unless you are a massive organization, you can't just design a spec and have people use it, and even if I tried I lack the skill to do so. Instead this will be done by giving the tools to actually use it, and hope it gains enough popularity that somebody else decides to create their own projects using it. We already have this for podcasts over RSS, and there's no reason it can't work over video too. The API will be defined in `srv-core`, and any Rust projects will be able to use it or any of the other `*-core` crates to get a head-start on interacting with the format, but the API is language agnostic.

This does fundamentally change the cost structure, and shifts the burden onto the creator who is now the host. This is why monetization features need to be built in from the start, but there should also be strategies to reduce that burden as much as possible. This is where some form of centralized hosting could come in. This spec fully allows for a wordpress plugin to manage this, or for some hosting provider to offer this as a subscription to the creator. As long as it communicates over the same API the client won't care. This is also where the stateless backend comes in. This will allow for srv to run through a stateless function using a cloud database and cloud storage. This means that the cost to the creator would scale directly with the usage, if they didn't have much traffic or store much video the bill could be as low as a couple dollars a month. If you got popular you'd only be paying for the functions that actually stream the video to your viewers.

The trade-off for that cost is that the creator also gets unparalleled control over their content and their monetization. This will allow the creator to recoup the costs by finding the right monetization scheme that works for them. Maybe they have a hard subscription based paywall using something like Patreon, Paypal, Stripe, or even a blockchain integration. You could implement your own advertisements, naturally in the video or injected before the content if you wanted. You could even forgo any strategy beyond merch sales. It's entirely the creator's choice, but if the viewer does not like it they can go to another channel with a different strategy, unlike with YouTube. This also gives the content creator more control over which advertisements show, so you could prevent companies you don't endorse from non-consensually using you to try and sell to your fans.

This is the main goal of this project, simply to provide an alternative, or to show that one can exist. Without any real choice both the creator and consumer lose all power to the only host available, and right now the alternative is to abstain. Instead of a different monolith who promises they won't do the same, we need to give people the option to do it themselves and take full ownership. As the data harvesting and advertising get more ever-present and insidious in every aspect of our lives, there needs to be an option for those who do not consent to being used that way, especially when the terms can change without your knowledge. By creating a completely free and open-source alternative I hope to ensure there is always another option.
